Diabetes Care in the Hospital has been revised to include a recommendation to consider obtaining an A1C in patients with risk factors for undiagnosed diabetes who exhibit hyperglycemia in the hospital.
Executive Summary: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetesd2013 Current criteria for the diagnosis of diabetesmyBullet A1C >=6.5%.
myBullet To test for diabetes or prediabetes, the A1C, FPG, or 75-g 2-h OGTT are appropriate. (B)
    Prevention/delay of type 2 diabetesmyBullet Patients with impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) (A), impaired fasting glucose (IFG) (E), or an A1C 5.7–6.4% (E) should be referred to an effective ongoing support program targeting weight loss of 7% of body weight and increasing physical activity to at least 150 min/week of moderate activity such as walking.
myBullet Metformin therapy for prevention of type 2 diabetes may be considered in those with IGT (A), IFG (E), or an A1C 5.7–6.4% (E), especially for those with BMI >35 kg/m2, aged <60 years, and women with prior GDM. (A)
myBullet Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) in conjunction with intensive insulin regimens can be a useful tool to lower A1C in selected adults (aged >=25 years) with type 1 diabetes. (A)
myBullet  Although the evidence for A1C lowering is less strong in children, teens, and younger adults, CGM may be helpful in these groups. (C)
    A1CmyBullet Perform the A1C test at least two times a year in patients who are meeting treatment goals (and who have stable glycemic control). (E)
myBullet Perform the A1C test quarterly in patients whose therapy has changed or who are not meeting glycemic goals. (E)
myBullet Use of point-of-care testing for A1C provides the opportunity for more timely treatment changes. (E)
Therefore, a reasonable A1C goal for many nonpregnant adults is <7%.
    Glycemic goals in adultsmyBullet Lowering A1C to below or around 7% has been shown to reduce microvascular complications of diabetes, and if implemented soon after the diagnosis of diabetes is associated with long-term reduction in macrovascular disease. (B)
myBullet Providers might reasonably suggest more  stringent  A1C  goals  (such  as <6.5%) for selected individual patients, if this can be achieved without significant hypoglycemia or other adverse effects of treatment. (C)
myBullet  Less  stringent  A1C  goals  (such  as <8%) may be appropriate for patients with a history of severe hypoglycemia, limited life expectancy, advanced microvascular or macrovascular complications, extensive comorbid conditions, and those with long-standing diabetes in whom the general goal is difficult to attain despite diabetes self-management education (DSME), appropriate glucose monitoring, and effective doses of multiple glucose-lowering agents including insulin. (B)
myBullet In newly diagnosed type 2 diabetic patients with markedly symptomatic and/or elevated blood glucose levels or A1C, consider insulin therapy, with or without additional agents, from the outset. (E)
myBullet If noninsulin monotherapy at maximal tolerated dose does not achieve or maintain the A1C target over 3–6 months, add a second oral agent, a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist, or insulin. (A)
    Preconception care c A1C levels should be as close to normal as possible (<7%) in an individual patient before conception is attempted. (B)
Use  of  A1C  as  a screening test for CFRD is not recommended. (B)
myBullet Consider obtaining an A1C on patients with diabetes admitted to the hospital if the result of testing in the previous 2–3 months is not available. (E)
myBullet Consider obtaining an A1C in patients with risk factors for undiagnosed diabetes who exhibit hyperglycemia in the hospital. (E)
Although point-of-care (POC) A1C assays may be NGSP certified, proficiency testing is not mandated for performing the test, so use of these assays for diagnostic purposes could be problematic.
In 2009, an International Expert Committee that included representatives of the ADA, the International Diabetes          Table 1 ADA evidence grading system for clinical practice recommendations         Level of evidence		Description     A	Clear evidence from well-conducted, generalizable RCTs that are adequately powered, including:myBullet Evidence from a well-conducted multicenter trialmyBullet Evidence from a meta-analysis that incorporated quality ratings in the analysismyBulletompelling nonexperimental evidence, i.e., “all or none” rule developed by the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine at the University of Oxford  Supportive evidence from well-conducted RCTs that are adequately powered, including:myBullet Evidence from a well-conducted trial at one or more institutionsmyBullet Evidence from a meta-analysis that incorporated quality ratings in the analysis B	Supportive evidence from well-conducted cohort studiesmyBullet Evidence from a well-conducted prospective cohort study or registrymyBullet Evidence from a well-conducted meta-analysis of cohort studies  Supportive evidence from a well-conducted case-control studymyBullet	Supportive evidence from poorly controlled or uncontrolled studiesmyBullet Evidence from randomized clinical trials with one or more major or three or more minor methodological flaws that could invalidate the resultsmyBullet Evidence from observational studies with high potential for bias (such as case series with comparison with historical controls)myBullet Evidence from case series or case reports Conflicting evidence with the weight of evidence supporting the recommendation  E	Expert consensus or clinical experience    Federation (IDF), and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD) recommended the use of the A1C test to diagnose diabetes, with a threshold of >=6.5% (6), and the ADA adopted this criterion in 2010 (5).
Epidemiological datasets show a similar relationship for A1C to the risk of retinopathy as has been shown for the corresponding FPG and 2-h PG thresholds.
The A1C has several advantages to the FPG and OGTT, including greater convenience (since fasting is not required), evidence to suggest greater preanalytical stability, and less day-to-day perturbations during periods of stress and illness.
These advantages must be balanced by greater cost, the limited availability of A1C testing in certain regions of the developing world, and the incomplete correlation between A1C and average glucose in certain individuals.
A recent epidemiological study found that, when matched for FPG, African Americans (with and without diabetes) indeed had higher A1C than whites, but also had higher levels of fructosamine and glycated albumin and lower levels of 1,5 anhydroglucitol, suggesting that their glycemic burden (particularly postprandially) may be higher (9).
Epidemiological studies forming the framework for recommending use of the A1C to diagnose diabetes have all been in adult populations.
A1C inaccurately reflects glycemia with certain anemias and hemoglobinopathies.
For patients with an abnormal hemoglobin but normal red cell turnover, such as sickle cell trait, an A1C assay without interference from abnormal hemoglobins should be used (an updated list is available at www. ngsp.org/interf.asp).
Just as there is less than 100% concordance between the FPG and 2-h PG tests, there is no perfect concordance between A1C and either glucose-based test.
Analyses of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data indicate that, assuming universal screening of the undiagnosed, the A1C cut point of >=6.5% identifies one-third fewer cases of undiagnosed diabetes than a fasting glucose cut point of >=126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L) (11), and numerous studies have confirmed that at these cut points the 2-h OGTT value diagnoses more screened people with diabetes (12).
Thus, the lower sensitivity of A1C at the designated cut point may well be offset by the test’s greater practicality, and wider application of a more convenient test (A1C) may actually increase the number of diagnoses made.
For example, if the A1C is 7.0% and a repeat result is 6.8%, the diagnosis of diabetes is confirmed.
However, if two different tests (such as A1C and FPG) are both above the diagnostic thresholds, the diagnosis of diabetes is also confirmed.
That is, if a patient meets the diabetes criterion of the A1C (two results >=6.5%) but not the FPG (<126 mg/ dL or 7.0 mmol/L), or vice versa, that person should be considered to have diabetes.
This is least likely for A1C, somewhat more likely for FPG, and most likely for the 2-h PG.
As is the case with the glucose measures, several prospective studies that used A1C to predict the progression to diabetes demonstrated a strong, continuous association between A1C and subsequent diabetes.
In a systematic review of 44,203 individuals from 16 cohort studies with a follow-up interval averaging 5.6 years (range 2.8–12 years), those with an A1C between 5.5 and 6.0% had a substantially increased risk of diabetes with 5-year incidences ranging from 9 to 25%.
An A1C range of 6.0–6.5% had a 5-year risk of developing diabetes between 25 to 50% and relative risk (RR) 20 times higher compared with an A1C of 5.0% (15).
In a communitybased study of black and white adults without diabetes, baseline A1C was a stronger predictor of subsequent diabetes and cardiovascular events than was fasting glucose (16).
Other analyses suggest that an A1C of 5.7% is associated with diabetes risk similar to that in the highrisk participants in the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) (17).
Table 2 Criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes       A1C >=6.5%.
Hence, it is reasonable to consider an A1C range of 5.7–6.4% as identifying individuals with prediabetes.
As is the case for individuals found to have IFG and IGT, individuals with an A1C of 5.7–6.4% should be informed of their increased risk for diabetes as well as CVD and counseled about effective strategies to lower their risks (see Section IV).
As with glucose measurements, the continuum of risk is curvilinear, so that as A1C rises, the risk of diabetes rises disproportionately (15).
Accordingly, interventions should be most intensive and follow-up particularly vigilant for those with A1Cs above 6.0%, who should be considered to be at very high risk.
myBullet To test for diabetes or prediabetes, the A1C, FPG, or 75-g 2-h OGTT are appropriate. (B)
     Table 3 Categories of increased risk for diabetes (prediabetes)*  FPG 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) to 125 mg/dL  (6.9 mmol/L) (IFG)  OR  2-h plasma glucose in the 75-g OGTT 140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L) to 199 mg/dL (11.0 mmol/L) (IGT)  OR  A1C 5.7–6.4%  *For all three tests, risk is continuous, extending below the lower limit of the range and becoming disproportionately greater at higher ends of the range.
The A1C, FPG, or the 2-h OGTT are appropriate for testing.
The efficacy of interventions for primary prevention of type 2 diabetes (23–29) has primarily been demonstrated among individuals with IGT, not for individuals with isolated IFG or for individuals with specific A1C levels.
1. Testing should be considered in all adults who are overweight (BMI >=25 kg/m2*) and have additional risk factors:myBullet physical inactivitymyBullet first-degree relative with diabetesmyBullet high-risk race/ethnicity (e.g., African American, Latino, Native American, Asian American, Pacific Islander)myBullet women who delivered a baby weighing .9 lb or were diagnosed with GDMmyBullet hypertension (>=140/90 mmHg or on therapy for hypertension)myBullet HDL cholesterol level <35 mg/dL (0.90 mmol/L) and/or a triglyceride level .250 mg/dL (2.82 mmol/L)myBullet women with polycystic ovary syndromemyBullet A1C >=5.7%, IGT, or IFG on previous testingmyBullet other clinical conditions associated with insulin resistance (e.g., severe obesity, acanthosis nigricans)myBullet history of CVD
Because of their prepartum treatment for hyperglycemia, use of the A1C for diagnosis of persistent diabetes at the postpartum visit is not recommended (44).
PREVENTION/DELAY OF TYPE 2 DIABETES    RecommendationsmyBullet Patients with IGT (A), IFG (E), or an A1C of 5.7–6.4% (E) should be referred to an effective ongoing support program targeting weight loss of 7% of body weight and increasing physical activity to at least 150 min/week of moderate activity such as walking.
myBullet Metformin therapy for prevention of type 2 diabetes may be considered in those with IGT (A), IFG (E), or an A1C of 5.7–6.4% (E), especially for those with BMI .35 kg/m2, aged ,60 years, and women with prior GDM. (A)
Based on the results of clinical trials and the known risks of progression of prediabetes to diabetes, persons with an     A1C of 5.7–6.4%, IGT, or IFG should be counseled on lifestyle changes with goals similar to those of the DPP (7% weight loss and moderate physical activity of at least 150 min/week).
Table 7 Components of the comprehensive diabetes evaluation       Medical historymyBullet Age and characteristics of onset of diabetes (e.g., DKA, asymptomatic laboratory finding)myBullet Eating patterns, physical activity habits, nutritional status, and weight history; growth and development in children and adolescentsmyBullet Diabetes education historymyBullet Review of previous treatment regimens and response to therapy (A1C records)myBullet Current treatment of diabetes, including medications, medication adherence and barriers thereto, meal plan, physical activity patterns, and readiness for behavior changemyBullet Results of glucose monitoring and patient’s use of datamyBullet DKA frequency, severity, and causemyBullet Hypoglycemic episodesmyBullet Hypoglycemia awarenessmyBullet Any severe hypoglycemia: frequency and causemyBullet History of diabetes-related complicationsmyBullet Microvascular: retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy (sensory, including history of foot lesions; autonomic, including sexual dysfunction and gastroparesis)myBullet Macrovascular: CHD, cerebrovascular disease, and PADmyBullet Other: psychosocial problems*, dental disease* Physical examinationmyBullet Height, weight, BMImyBullet Blood pressure determination, including orthostatic measurements when indicatedmyBullet Fundoscopic examination*myBullet Thyroid palpationmyBullet Skin examination (for acanthosis nigricans and insulin injection sites)myBullet Comprehensive foot examinationmyBullet InspectionmyBullet Palpation of dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulsesmyBullet Presence/absence of patellar and Achilles reflexesmyBullet Determination of proprioception, vibration, and monofilament sensation Laboratory evaluationmyBullet A1C, if results not available within past 2–3 months If not performed/available within past yearmyBullet Fasting lipid profile, including total, LDL and HDL cholesterol and triglyceridesmyBullet Liver function testsmyBullet Test for urine albumin excretion with spot urine albumin-to-creatinine ratiomyBullet Serum creatinine and calculated GFRmyBullet TSH in type 1 diabetes, dyslipidemia or women over age 50 years ReferralsmyBullet Eye care professional for annual dilated eye exammyBullet Family planning for women of reproductive agemyBullet Registered dietitian for MNTmyBullet DSMEmyBullet Dentist for comprehensive periodontal examinationmyBullet Mental health professional, if needed       *See appropriate referrals for these categories.
1. Assessment of glycemic control Two primary techniques are available for health providers and patients to assess the effectiveness of the management plan on glycemic control: patient self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) or interstitial glucose, and A1C.  a.
 c Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) in conjunction with intensive insulin regimens can be a useful tool to lower A1C in selected adults (aged >=25 years) with type 1 diabetes. (A)
 c Although the evidence for A1C lowering is less strong in children, teens, and younger adults, CGM may be helpful in these groups. (C)
Although there are few rigorous studies, a database study of almost 27,000 children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes showed that, after adjustment for multiple confounders, increased daily frequency of SMBG was significantly associated with lower A1C (20.2% per additional test per day, leveling off at five tests per day) and with fewer acute complications (57).
A recent meta-analysis suggested that SMBG reduced A1C by 0.25% at 6 months (61), while a Cochrane review concluded that the overall effect of SMBG in such patients is small up to 6 months after initiation and subsides after 12 months (62).
In one study of insulin-naïve patients with suboptimal initial glycemic control, use of structured SMBG (a paper tool to collect and interpret 7-point SMBG profiles over 3 days at least quarterly) reduced A1C by 0.3% more than in an active control group (65).
A 26-week randomized trial of 322 type 1 diabetic patients showed that adults aged >=25 years using intensive insulin therapy and CGM experienced a 0.5% reduction in A1C (from ~7.6 to 7.1%) compared with usual intensive insulin therapy with SMBG (66).
Sensor use in children, teens, and adults to age 24 years did not result in significant A1C lowering, and there was no significant difference in hypoglycemia in any group.
Importantly, the greatest predictor of A1C lowering in this study for all age-groups was frequency of sensor use, which was lower in younger age-groups.
In a smaller RCT of 129 adults and children with baseline A1C <7.0%, outcomes combining A1C and hypoglycemia favored the group utilizing CGM, suggesting that CGM is also beneficial for individuals with type 1 diabetes who have already achieved excellent control (67).
Overall, meta-analyses suggest that compared with SMBG, CGM lowers A1C by ~0.26% (70).
Altogether, these data suggest that, in appropriately selected patients who are motivated to wear it most of the time, CGM reduces A1C.
A trial comparing CGM plus insulin pump to SMBG plus multiple injections of insulin in adults and children with type  1 diabetes showed significantly greater improvements in A1C with “sensoraugmented pump” therapy (68,69), but this trial did not isolate the effect of CGM itself.
A1C  RecommendationsmyBullet Perform the A1C test at least two times a year in patients who are meeting treatment goals (and who have stable glycemic control). (E)
myBullet Perform the A1C test quarterly in patients whose therapy has changed or who are not meeting glycemic goals. (E)
myBullet Use of POC testing for A1C provides the opportunity for more timely treatment changes. (E)
For any individual patient, the frequency of A1C testing should be dependent on the clinical situation, the treatment regimen used, and the judgment of the clinician.
The availability of the A1C result at the time that the patient is seen (POC testing) has been reported in small studies to result in increased intensification of therapy and improvement in glycemic control (73,74).
However, two recent systematic reviews and meta-analyses found no significant difference in A1C between POC and laboratory A1C usage (75,76).
    Because A1C is thought to reflect average glycemia over several months (63) and has strong predictive value for diabetes complications (71,72), A1C testing should be performed routinely in all patients with diabetes, at initial assessment and then as part of continuing care.
The A1C test is subject to certain limitations.
Conditions that affect erythrocyte turnover (hemolysis, blood loss) and hemoglobin variants must be considered, particularly when the A1C result does not correlate with the patient’s clinical situation (63).
In addition, A1C does not provide a measure of glycemic variability or hypoglycemia.
For patients prone to glycemic variability (especially type 1 diabetic patients or type 2 diabetic patients with severe insulin deficiency), glycemic control is best judged by the combination of results of self-monitoring and the A1C.
The A1C may also serve as a check on the accuracy of the patient’s meter (or the patient’s reported SMBG results) and the adequacy of the SMBG testing schedule.
Table 8 contains the correlation between A1C levels and mean plasma glucose levels based on data from the international A1C-Derived Average Glucose (ADAG) trial utilizing frequent SMBG and CGM in 507 adults (83% Caucasian) with type 1, type 2, and no diabetes (77).
The ADA and the American Association for Clinical Chemistry have determined that the correlation (r = 0.92) is strong enough to justify reporting both an A1C result and an estimated average glucose (eAG) result when a clinician orders the A1C test.
The table in pre2009 versions of the “Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes” describing the correlation between A1C and mean glucose was derived from relatively sparse data (one 7-point profile over 1 day per A1C reading) in the primarily Caucasian type 1 diabetic participants in the DCCT (78).
Clinicians should note that the numbers in the table are now different, as they are based on ~2,800 readings per A1C in the ADAG trial.
In the ADAG trial, there were no significant differences among racial and ethnic groups in the regression lines between A1C and mean glucose, although there was a trend toward a difference between African/African American participants and Caucasian ones.
A small study comparing A1C to CGM data in type 1 diabetic children found a highly statistically significant correlation between A1C and mean blood glucose, although the correlation (r = 0.7) was significantly lower than in the ADAG trial (79).
Whether there are significant differences in how A1C relates to average glucose in children or in African American patients is an area for further study.
For the time being, the question has not led to different recommendations about testing A1C or to different interpretations of the clinical meaning of given levels of A1C in those populations.
The correlation between A1C and average glucose was 0.92 (ref. 77).
A calculator for converting A1C results into eAG, in either mg/dL or mmol/L, is available at http://professional.diabetes.org/eAG.
Table 8-Correlation of A1C with average glucose          	Mean plasma glucose 	   A1C (%)	mg/dL	mmol/L 6	126	7.0		 7 8	154 183	8.6 10.2	 9	212	11.8		 10	240	13.4 11	269	14.9 12	298	16.5    These estimates are based on ADAG data of ;2,700 glucose measurements over 3 months per A1C measurement in 507 adults with type 1, type 2, and no diabetes.
For patients in whom A1C/eAG and measured blood glucose appear discrepant, clinicians should consider the possibilities of hemoglobinopathy or altered red cell turnover, and the options of more frequent and/or different timing of SMBG or use of CGM.
Other measures of chronic glycemia such as fructosamine are available, but their linkage to average glucose and their prognostic significance are not as clear as is the case for A1C.
Therefore, a reasonable A1C goal for many nonpregnant adults is <7%.
Glycemic goals in adults  RecommendationsmyBullet Lowering A1C to below or around 7% has been shown to reduce microvascular complications of diabetes and if implemented soon after the diagnosis of diabetes is associated with long-term reduction in macrovascular disease. (B)
myBullet Providers might reasonably suggest more  stringent  A1C  goals  (such  as <6.5%) for selected individual patients, if this can be achieved without significant hypoglycemia or other adverse effects of treatment. (C)
myBullet   Less  stringent  A1C  goals  (such  as <8%) may be appropriate for patients with a history of severe hypoglycemia, limited life expectancy, advanced microvascular or macrovascular complications, extensive comorbid conditions, and those with long-standing diabetes in whom the general goal is difficult to attain despite DSME, appropriate glucose monitoring, and effective doses of multiple glucose-lowering agents including insulin. (B)
The Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial (VADT) showed significant reductions in albuminuria with intensive (achieved median A1C 6.9%) compared with standard glycemic control, but no difference in retinopathy and neuropathy (86,87).
The Action in Diabetes and Vascular Disease: Preterax and Diamicron MR Controlled Evaluation (ADVANCE) study of intensive versus standard glycemic control in type 2 diabetes found a statistically significant reduction in albuminuria, but not in neuropathy or retinopathy, with an A1C target of ,6.5% (achieved median A1C 6.3%) compared with standard therapy achieving a median A1C of 7.0% (88).
Epidemiological analyses of the DCCT and UKPDS (71,72) demonstrate a curvi-linear relationship between A1C and microvascular complications.
These analyses also suggest that further lowering of A1C from 7 to 6% is associated with further reduction in the risk of microvascular complications, albeit the absolute risk reductions become much smaller.
However, selected individual patients, especially those with little comorbidity and long life expectancy (who may reap the benefits of further lowering of glycemia below 7%), may, based on provider judgment and patient preferences, adopt more intensive glycemic targets (e.g., an A1C target <6.5%) as long as significant hypoglycemia does not become a barrier.
The ACCORD study enrolled participants with either known CVD or two or more major cardiovascular risk factors and randomized them to intensive glycemic control (goal A1C <6%) or standard glycemic control (goal A1C 7–8%).
The ACCORD investigators subsequently published additional epidemiological analyses showing no increase in mortality in the intensive arm participants who achieved A1C levels below 7% nor in those who lowered their A1C quickly after trial enrollment.
In fact, although there was no A1C level at which intensive arm participants had significantly lower mortality than standard arm participants, the highest risk for mortality was observed in intensive arm participants with the highest A1C levels (96).
Unlike the case with the DCCT trial, where lower achieved A1C levels were related to significantly increased rates of severe hypoglycemia, in ACCORD every 1% decline in A1C from baseline to 4 months into the trial was associated with a significant decrease in the rate of severe hypoglycemia in both arms (96).
Intensive glycemic control (to a goal A1C<6.5% vs. treatment to local standards) significantly reduced the primary end point.
The VADT randomized participants with type 2 diabetes uncontrolled on insulin or maximal-dose oral agents (median entry A1C 9.4%) to a strategy of intensive glycemic control (goal A1C<6.0%) or standard glycemic control, with a planned A1C separation of at least 1.5%.
Certainly, providers should be vigilant in preventing severe hypoglycemia in patients with advanced disease and should not aggressively attempt to achieve near-normal A1C levels in patients in whom such a target cannot be safely and reasonably easily achieved.
The recommendations are based on those for A1C values, with listed blood glucose levels that appear to correlate with achievement of an A1C of <7%.
It is clear that postprandial hyperglycemia, like preprandial hyperglycemia, contributes to elevated A1C levels, with its relative contribution being higher at A1C levels that are closer to 7%.
However, outcome studies have clearly shown A1C to be the primary predictor of complications, and landmark glycemic control trials such as the DCCT and UKPDS relied overwhelmingly on preprandial SMBG.
A reasonable recommendation for postprandial testing and targets is that for individuals who have premeal glucose values within target but have A1C values above target, monitoring postprandial plasma glucose (PPG) 1–2 h after the start of the meal and treatment aimed at reducing PPG values to <180 mg/dL may help lower A1C.
As regards goals for glycemic control for women with GDM, recommendations from the fifth International Workshop-Conference on Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (105) were to target maternal capillary glucose concentrations of:   myBullet preprandial: <=95 mg/dL (5.3 mmol/L), and either:myBullet 1-h postmeal: <=140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L) ormyBullet 2-h postmeal: <=120 mg/dL (6.7 mmol/L)    For women with pre-existing type 1 or type 2 diabetes who become pregnant, a recent consensus statement (106) recommended the following as optimal glycemic goals, if they can be achieved without excessive hypoglycemia:  myBullet premeal, bedtime, and overnight glucose 60–99 mg/dL (3.3–5.4 mmol/L)myBullet peak postprandial glucose 100–129 mg/dL (5.4–7.1 mmol/L)myBullet  A1C <6.0%      D.
These analogs are associated with less hypoglycemia with equal A1C lowering in type 1 diabetes (107,108).
Table 9-Summary of glycemic recommendations for many nonpregnant adults with diabetes          A1C	<7.0%*  Preprandial capillary plasma glucose	70–130 mg/dL* (3.9–7.2 mmol/L)  Peak postprandial capillary plasma glucose†<180 mg/dL* (<10.0 mmol/L)myBullet *Goals should be individualized based on:myBullet duration of diabetesmyBullet age/life expectancymyBullet comorbid conditionsmyBullet known CVD or advanced microvascular complicationsmyBullet hypoglycemia unawarenessmyBullet individual patient considerationsmyBullet More or less stringent glycemic goals may be appropriate for individual patientsmyBullet Postprandial glucose may be targeted if A1C goals are   	no t me t de sp i te re a c hi ng pr e pr a nd ia l g lu c os e go a ls 	  †Postprandial glucose measurements should be made 1–2 h after the beginning of the meal, generally peak levels in patients with diabetes.
Although most studies of MDI versus pump therapy have been small and of short duration, a systematic review and meta-analysis concluded that there were no systematic differences in A1C or rates of severe hypoglycemia in children and adults between the two forms of intensive insulin therapy (70).
myBullet In newly diagnosed type 2 diabetic patients with markedly symptomatic and/or elevated blood glucose levels or A1C, consider insulin therapy, with or without additional agents, from the outset. (E)
myBullet If noninsulin monotherapy at maximal tolerated dose does not achieve or maintain the A1C target over 3–6 months, add a second oral agent, a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist, or insulin. (A)
Comparative effectiveness meta-analyses (112) suggest that overall each new class of noninsulin agents added to initial therapy lowers A1C around 0.9–1.1%.
Clinical trials/outcome studies of MNT have reported decreases in A1C at 3–6 months ranging from 0.25 to 2.9% with higher reductions seen in type 2 diabetes of shorter duration.
Multiple studies have demonstrated sustained improvements in A1C at 12 months and longer when a registered dietitian provided follow-up visits ranging from monthly to 3 sessions per year (115–122).
For individuals with type 2 diabetes, studies have demonstrated that moderate weight loss (5% of body weight) is associated with decreased insulin resistance, improved measures of glycemia and lipemia, and reduced blood pressure (134); longerterm studies (>=52 weeks) showed mixed effects on A1C in adults with type 2 diabetes (135–137), and in some studies results were confounded by pharmacological weight loss therapy.
One-year results of the intensive lifestyle intervention in this trial show an average 8.6% weight loss, significant reduction of A1C, and reduction in several CVD risk factors (138), with benefits sustained at 4 years (139).
Evidence for the benefits of DSME and DSMS  Multiple studies have found that DSME is associated with improved diabetes knowledge and improved self-care behavior (146), improved clinical outcomes such as lower A1C (147,148,150,151,155–158), lower self-reported weight (146), improved quality of life (149,156,159), healthy coping (160), and lower costs (161).
Structured exercise interventions of at least 8 weeks’ duration have been shown to lower A1C by an average of 0.66% in people with type 2 diabetes, even with no significant change in BMI (187).
Higher levels of exercise intensity are associated with greater improvements in A1C and in fitness (188).
Clinical trials have provided strong evidence for the A1C lowering value of resistance training in older adults with type 2 diabetes (192,193) and for an additive benefit of combined aerobic and resistance exercise in adults with type 2 diabetes (194,195).
A systematic review and meta-analysis showed that psychosocial interventions modestly but significantly improved A1C (standardized mean difference 20.29%) and mental health outcomes.
However, there was a limited association between the effects on A1C and mental health, and no intervention characteristics predicted benefit on both outcomes (208).
As described in the Section V.b.2, severe hypoglycemia was associated with mortality in participants in both the standard and intensive glycemia arms of the ACCORD trial, but the relationships with achieved A1C and treatment intensity were not straightforward.
Table 10 summarizes common treatment goals for A1C, blood pressure, and LDL cholesterol.
Table 10 Summary of recommendations for glycemic, blood pressure, and lipid control for most adults with diabetes  A1C	<7.0%*  Blood pressure	<140/80 mmHg** Lipids  LDL cholesterol	<100 mg/dL (<2.6 mmol/L)†  Statin therapy for those with history of MI or age over 401 other risk factors  *More or less stringent glycemic goals may be appropriate for individual patients.
A meta-analysis reported a significant 0.47% improvement in A1C, but noted multiple problems with the quality of the published studies included in the analysis (400).
In selecting glycemic goals, the benefits on long-term health outcomes of achieving a lower A1C should be balanced against the risks of hypoglycemia and the developmental burdens of intensive regimens in children and youth.
Age-specific glycemic and A1C goals are presented in Table 15.  b.
Table 15 Plasma blood glucose and A1C goals for type 1 diabetes by age-group  Plasma blood glucose goal range (mg/dL)  Values by age (years)	Before meals	Bedtime/ overnight	A1C	Rationale  Toddlers and preschoolers (0–6)	100–180	110–200 <8.5%	c Vulnerability to hypoglycemia  				c Insulin sensitivity  				c Unpredictability in dietary intake and physical activity  				c A lower goal (,8.0%) is reasonable if it can be    School age (6–12)	90–180	100–180	<8%	achieved without excessive hypoglycemia  myBullet Vulnerability of hypoglycemia  				c A lower goal (,7.5%) is reasonable if it can be    Adolescents and young adults (13–19)	90–130	90–150	<7.5%	achieved without excessive hypoglycemia  myBullet A lower goal (,7.0%) is reasonable if it can be achieved without excessive hypoglycemia  Key concepts in setting glycemic goals:myBullet Goals should be individualized and lower goals may be reasonable based on benefit-risk assessment.
c Postprandial blood glucose values should be measured when there is a discrepancy between preprandial blood glucose values and A1C levels and to help assess glycemia in those on basal/bolus regimens.
Preconception care  RecommendationsmyBullet A1C levels should be as close to normal as possible (<7%) in an individual patient before conception is attempted. (B)
Observational studies indicate that the risk of malformations increases continuously with increasing maternal glycemia during the first 6–8 weeks of gestation, as defined by first-trimester A1C concentrations.
There is no threshold for A1C values below which risk disappears entirely.
However, malformation rates above the 1–2% background rate of nondiabetic pregnancies appear to be limited to pregnancies in which first-trimester A1C concentrations are >1% above the normal range for a nondiabetic pregnant woman.
Goals were set to achieve normal blood glucose concentrations, and >80% of subjects achieved normal A1C concentrations before they became pregnant.
The goals of preconception care are to 1) involve and empower the patient in the management of her diabetes, 2) achieve the lowest A1C test results possible without excessive hypoglycemia, 3) assure effective contraception until stable and acceptable glycemia is achieved, and 4) identify, evaluate, and treat longterm diabetes complications such as retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy, hypertension, and CHD (106).
Use  of  A1C  as  a screening test for CFRD is not recommended. (B)
myBullet Consider obtaining an A1C on patients with diabetes admitted to the hospital if the result of testing in the previous 2–3 months is not available. (E)
myBullet Consider obtaining an A1C in patients with risk factors for undiagnosed diabetes who exhibit hyperglycemia in the hospital. (E)
The difficulty distinguishing between the second and third categories during the hospitalization may be overcome by measuring an A1C in undiagnosed patients with hyperglycemia, as long as conditions interfering with A1C utility (hemolysis, blood transfusion) have not occurred.
A1C values >6.5% suggest, in undiagnosed patients, that diabetes preceded hospitalization (466).
Mean A1C nationally has declined from 7.82% in 1999– 2000 to 7.18% in 2004 based on NHANES data (495).
Nevertheless in some studies only 57.1% of adults with diagnosed diabetes achieved an A1C of <7%, only 45.5% had a blood pressure <130/80 mmHg, and just 46.5% had a total cholesterol <200 mg/dL, with only 12.2% of people with diabetes achieving all three treatment goals (496).
    There has been steady improvement in the proportion of diabetic patients achieving recommended levels of A1C, blood pressure, and LDL cholesterol in the last 10 years, both in primary care settings and in endocrinology practices.
Strategies such as explicit goal setting with patients (504); identifying and addressing language, numeracy, or cultural barriers to care (505–508); integrating evidence-based guidelines and clinical information tools into the process of care (509–511); and incorporating care management teams including nurses, pharmacists, and other providers (512–515) have each been shown to optimize provider and team behavior and thereby catalyze reduction in A1C, blood pressure, and LDL cholesterol.
International Expert Committee report on the role of the A1C assay in the diagnosis of diabetes.
11. Cowie CC, Rust KF, Byrd-Holt DD, et al. Prevalence of diabetes and high risk for diabetes using A1C criteria in the U.S. population in 1988-2006.
15. Zhang X, Gregg EW, Williamson DF, et al. A1C level and future risk of diabetes: a systematic review.
65. Polonsky WH, fisher L, Schikman CH, et al. Structured self-monitoring of blood glucose significantly reduces A1C levels in poorly controlled, noninsulin-treated type 2 diabetes: results from the Structured Testing Program study.
77. Nathan DM, Kuenen J, Borg R, Zheng H, Schoenfeld D, Heine RJ; A1C-Derived Average Glucose Study Group.
Translating the A1C assay into estimated average glucose values.
Relationship of A1C to glucose concentrations in children with type 1 diabetes: assessments by high-frequency glucose determinations by sensors.
Epidemiologic relationships between A1C and all-cause mortality during a median 3.4year follow-up of glycemic treatment in the ACCORD trial.
During this asymptomatic period, it is possible to demonstrate an abnormality in carbohydrate metabolism by measurement of plasma glucose in the fasting state or after a challenge with an oral glucose load or by A1C.
As A1C is used more commonly to diagnose diabetes in individuals with risk factors, it will also identify those at higher risk for developing diabetes in the future.
When recommending the use of the A1C to diagnose diabetes in its 2009 report, the International Expert Committee (3) stressed the continuum of risk for diabetes with all glycemic measures and did not formally identify an equivalent intermediate category for A1C.
The group did note that those with A1C levels above the laboratory “normal” range but below the diagnostic cut point for diabetes (6.0 to <6.5%) are at very high risk of developing diabetes.
Indeed, incidence of diabetes in people with A1C levels in this range is more than 10 times that of people with lower levels (4–7).
Analyses of nationally representative data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) indicate that the A1C value that most accurately identifies people with IFG or IGT falls between 5.5 and 6.0%.
In addition, linear regression analyses of these data indicate that among the nondiabetic adult population, an FPG of 110 mg/dl (6.1 mmol/l) corresponds to an A1C of 5.6%, while an FPG of 100 mg/dl (5.6 mmol/l) corresponds to an A1C of 5.4% (R.T. Ackerman, personal communication). finally, evidence from the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP), wherein the mean A1C was 5.9% (SD 0.5%), indicates that preventive interventions are effective in groups of people with A1C levels both below and above 5.9% (9).
For these reasons, the most appropriate A1C level above which to initiate preventive interventions is likely to be somewhere in the range of 5.5–6%.
Prospective studies indicate that people within the A1C range of 5.5– 6.0% have a 5-year cumulative incidence of diabetes that ranges from 12 to 25% (4–7), which is appreciably (threeto eightfold) higher than incidence in the  U.S. population as a whole (8).
As was the case with FPG and 2-h PG, defining a lower limit of an intermediate category of A1C is somewhat arbitrary, as the risk of diabetes with any measure or surrogate of glycemia is a continuum, extending well into the normal ranges.
To maximize equity and efficiency of preventive interventions, such an A1C cut point should balance the costs of “false negatives” (failing to identify those who are going to develop diabetes) against the costs of “false positives” (falsely identifying and then spending intervention resources on those who were not going to develop diabetes anyway).
As is the case with the glucose measures, several prospective studies that used A1C to predict the progression to diabetes demonstrated a strong, continuous association between A1C and subsequent diabetes.
In a systematic review of 44,203 individuals from 16 cohort studies with a follow-up interval averaging 5.6 years (range 2.8–12 years), those with an A1C between 5.5 and 6.0% had a substantially increased risk of diabetes with 5-year incidences ranging from 9 to 25%.
An A1C range of 6.0–6.5% had a 5-year risk of developing diabetes between 25 and 50% and relative risk 20 times higher compared with an A1C of 5.0% (10).
In a community-based study of black and white adults without diabetes, baseline A1C was a stronger predictor of subsequent diabetes and cardiovascular events than was fasting glucose (11).
Other analyses suggest that an A1C of 5.7% is associated with similar diabetes risk to the high-risk participants in the DPP (12).
Hence, it is reasonable to consider an A1C range of 5.7–6.4% as identifying individuals with high risk for future diabetes, to whom the term prediabetes may be applied.
Individuals with an A1C of 5.7–6.4% should be informed of their increased risk for diabetes as well as cardiovascular disease and counseled about effective strategies, such as weight loss and physical activity, to lower their risks.
As with glucose measurements, the continuum of risk is curvilinear, so that as A1C rises, the risk of  diabetes  rises  disproportionately.
Accordingly, interventions should be most intensive and follow-up should be particularly vigilant for those with A1C levels above 6.0%, who should be considered to be at very high risk.
However, just as an individual with a fasting glucose of 98 mg/dl (5.4 mmol/l) may not be at negligible risk for diabetes, individuals with A1C levels below 5.7% may still be at risk, depending on level of A1C and presence of other risk factors, such as obesity and family history.
The Committee examined data from three cross-sectional epidemiologic studies that assessed retinopathy with fundus photography or direct ophthalmoscopy and measured glycemia as FPG, 2-h PG, and A1C.
Table 2 Categories of increased risk for diabetes (prediabetes)*  FPG 100 mg/dl (5.6 mmol/l) to 125 mg/dl (6.9 mmol/l) [IFG]  2-h PG in the 75-g OGTT 140 mg/dl (7.8 mmol/l) to 199 mg/dl (11.0 mmol/l) [IGT] A1C 5.7–6.4%  *For all three tests, risk is continuous, extending below the lower limit of the range and becoming disproportionately greater at higher ends of the range.
A1C is  a  widely used  marker  of chronic glycemia, reflecting average blood glucose levels over a 2to 3-month period of time.
Prior Expert Committees have not recommended use of the A1C for diagnosis of diabetes, in part due to lack of standardization of the assay.
However, A1C assays are now highly standardized so that their results can be  uniformly applied both temporally and across populations.
In their recent report (3), an International Expert Committee, after an extensive review of both established and emerging epidemiological evidence, recommended the use of the A1C test to diagnose diabetes, with a threshold of >=6.5%, and ADA affirms this decision.
The diagnostic A1C cut point of 6.5% is associated with an inflection point for retinopathy prevalence, as are the diagnostic thresholds for FPG and 2-h PG (3).
Point-of-care A1C assays are not sufficiently accurate at this time to use for diagnostic purposes.
There is an inherent logic to using a more chronic versus an acute marker of dysglycemia, particularly since the A1C is already widely familiar to clinicians as a marker of glycemic control.
Moreover, the A1C has several advantages to the FPG, including greater convenience, since fasting is not required, evidence to suggest greater preanalytical stability, and less day-to-day perturbations during periods of stress and illness.
These advantages, however, must be balanced by greater cost, the limited availability of A1C testing in certain regions of the developing world, and the incomplete correlation between A1C and average glucose in certain individuals.
In addition, the A1C can be misleading in patients with certain forms of anemia and hemoglobinopathies, which may also have unique ethnic or geographic distributions.
For patients with a hemoglobinopathy but normal red cell turnover, such as sickle cell trait, an A1C assay without interference from abnormal hemoglobins should be used (an updated list is available at http://www.ngsp.org/interf.asp).
It is likely that in such cases the health care professional would also measure an A1C test as part of the initial assessment of the severity of the diabetes and that it would (in most cases) be above the diagnostic cut point for diabetes.
However, in rapidly evolving diabetes, such as the development of type 1 diabetes in some children, A1C may not be significantly elevated despite frank diabetes.
Just as there is less than 100% concordance between the FPG and 2-h PG tests, there is not full concordance between A1C and either glucose-based test.
Analyses of NHANES data indicate that, assuming universal screening of the undiagnosed,  the  A1C cut  point  of >=6.5% identifies one-third fewer cases of undiagnosed diabetes than a fasting glucose cut point of >=126 mg/dl (7.0 mmol/l) (www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/ factsheet11/tables1_2.htm).
Thus, it is conceivable that the lower sensitivity of A1C at the designated cut point will be offset by the test’s greater practicality, and that wider application of a more convenient test (A1C) may actually increase the number of diagnoses made.
Further research is needed to better characterize those patients whose glycemic status might be categorized differently by two different tests (e.g., FPG and A1C), obtained in close temporal approximation.
Such discordance may arise from measurement variability, change over time, or because A1C, FPG, and postchallenge glucose each measure different physiological processes.
In the setting of an elevated A1C but “nondiabetic” FPG, the likelihood of greater postprandial glucose levels or increased glycation rates for a given degree of hyperglycemia may be present.
In the opposite scenario (high FPG yet A1C below the diabetes cut point), augmented hepatic glucose production or reduced glycation rates may be present.
For example, if the A1C is 7.0% and a repeat result is 6.8%, the diagnosis of diabetes is confirmed.
However, there are scenarios in which results of two different tests (e.g., FPG and A1C) are available for the same patient.
That is, if a patient meets the diabetes criterion of the A1C (two results >=6.5%) but not the FPG (,126 mg/dl or 7.0 mmol/l), or vice versa, that person should be considered to have diabetes.
This is least likely for A1C, somewhat more likely for FPG, and most likely for the 2-h PG.
Table 3 Criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes 	  A1C >=6.5%.
International Expert Committee report on the role of the A1C assay in the diagnosis of diabetes.
Combined measurement of fasting plasma glucose and A1C is effective for the prediction of type 2 diabetes: the Kansai Healthcare Study.
10. Zhang X, Gregg EW, Williamson DF, Barker LE, Thomas W, Bullard KW, Imperatore G, Williams DE, Albright AL. A1C level and future risk of diabetes: a systematic review.
A management plan to achieve normal or near-normal glycemia with an A1C goal of ,7% should be developed for diabetes management at the time of initial medical evaluation.
Table 1 Summary of recommendations for glycemic, blood pressure, and lipid control for most adults with diabetes  A1C	<7.0%*  Blood pressure	<140/80 mmHg†  Lipids <100 mg/dL LDL cholesterol (<2.6 mmol/L)‡    *More or less stringent glycemic goals may be appropriate for individual patients.
Glycated hemoglobin (A1C) is a measure of long-term (2to 3-month) glycemic control.
Perform the A1C test at least two times  a year in patients who are meeting treatment goals (and who have stable glycemic control) and quarterly in patients whose therapy has changed or who are not meeting glycemic goals.
Discrepancies between CBG monitoring results and A1C may indicate a hemoglobinopathy, hemolysis, or need for evaluation of CBG monitoring technique and equipment or initiation of more frequent CBG monitoring to identify when glycemic excursions are occurring and which facet of the diabetes regimen is changing.
myBullet   A1C  should  be checked  every  3–6 months. (E)
At a minimum, the summary should include the following:myBullet the patient’s current medication schedule and dosagesmyBullet the date and time of the last medication administrationmyBullet any recent monitoring results (e.g., CBG and A1C)myBullet other factors that indicate a need for immediate treatment or management at the receiving facility (e.g., recent episodes of hypoglycemia, history of severe hypoglycemia or frequent DKA, concurrent illnesses, presence of diabetes complications)myBullet information on scheduled treatment/ appointments if the receiving facility is responsible for transporting the patient to that appointmentmyBullet name and telephone/fax number of a contact person at the transferring facility who can provide additional information, if needed    The medical transfer summary, which acts as a quick medical reference for the receiving facility, should be transferred along with the patient.
The patient should be provided with a written summary of his/her current health care issues, including medications and doses, recent A1C values, etc.    RecommendationsmyBullet For all interinstitutional transfers, complete a medical transfer summary to be transferred with the patient. (E)
The data needed will vary depending on the type of job and the reason for the evaluation, but an evaluation should never be made based only on one piece of data, such as a single blood glucose result or A1C result.
A1C and estimated average glucose.
Hemoglobin A1C (A1C) test results reflect average glycemia over several months and correlate with mean plasma glucose levels (4).
Estimated average glucose (eAG) is directly related to A1C and also provides an individual with an estimate of average blood glucose over a period of time, but it uses the same values and units that are observed when using a glucose meter or recording a fasting glucose value on a lab report (5).
A1C/eAG values provide health care providers with important information about the effectiveness of an individual’s treatment regimen (4) but are often misused in assessing whether   an   individual myBulletan   safely perform a job.
Because they identify only averages and not whether the person had severe extreme blood glucose readings, A1C/eAG results are of no value in predicting short-term complications of diabetes and thus have no use in evaluating individuals in employment situations.
The American Diabetes Association recommends that in most patients A1C levels be kept below 7% (4), or eAG below 154 mg/dL.
An A1C or eAG cut off score is not medically justified in employment evaluations and should never be a determinative factor in employment.
5. Nathan DM, Kuenen J, Borg R, Zheng H, Schoenfeld D, Heine R: Translating the A1C assay into estimated average glucose values.
The ABCs of diabetes: diabetes self-management education program for African Americans affects A1C, lipid-lowering agent prescriptions, and emergency department visits.
EXPERT COMMITTEE REPORTS  International Expert Committee Report on the Role of the A1C Assay in the Diagnosis of Diabetes  International Expert Committee  Diabetes Care 32:1327–1334, 2009  myBulletONSENSUS REPORTS  Diabetes in Older Adults  M.
