British Guideline on the Management of Asthma
Section 4: Pharmacological management

The aims of pharmacological management of asthma are the control of symptoms, including nocturnal symptoms and exercise-induced asthma, prevention of exacerbations and the achievement of best possible pulmonary function, with minimal side-effects.

It is not appropriate to define a fixed level of lung function or symptom control which must be achieved, as individual patients will have different goals and may also wish to balance these aims against the potential side-effects or inconvenience of taking the medication necessary to achieve "perfect" control. In general terms, control of asthma is assessed against these standards:

minimal symptoms during day and night
minimal need for reliever medication
no exacerbations
no limitation of physical activity
normal lung function (in practical terms FEV1 and/or PEF >80% predicted or best)

A stepwise approach aims to abolish symptoms as soon as possible and to optimise peak flow by starting treatment at the level most likely to achieve this. Patients should start treatment at the step most appropriate to the initial severity of their asthma. The aim is to achieve early control and to maintain control by stepping up treatment as necessary and stepping down when control is good (see Figures 4, 5& 6 for summaries of stepwise management in adults and children).

Before initiating a new drug therapy practitioners should check compliance with existing therapies (see section 11), inhaler technique (see section 5) and eliminate trigger factors (see section 3). 
All doses of inhaled steroids in this section refer to beclomethasone (BDP) given via a metered dose inhaler (pMDI). Adjustment is necessary for fluticasone and mometasone and may also be necessary for alternative devices.
1 Adults
2 Children aged 5-12 years
3 Children under 5 year
Recommendation does not apply to this age group.
 4. 1 Step 1: mild intermittent asthma

The following medicines act as short-acting bronchodilators:

    inhaled short-acting beta2 agonists 
    >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1+ | <5 Evidence level 4
    inhaled ipratropium bromide 
    >12 Evidence level 1+ | 5-12 Evidence level 1++
    beta2 agonist tablets or syrup 
    >12 Evidence level 1++
    theophyllines. 
    >12 Evidence level 1++

Short-acting inhaled beta2 agonists work more quickly and/or with fewer side-effects than the alternatives. 
A 	B 	D 	Prescribe an inhaled short-acting beta2 agonist as short-term reliever therapy for all patients with symptomatic asthma.

    4.1.1 FREQUENCY OF DOSING OF INHALED SHORT-ACTING BETA2 AGONISTS

    There is no consistent evidence of any benefit or harm from regular (four times daily) use of short-acting beta2 agonists compared with as required use.Unless individual patients are shown to benefit from regular use of inhaled short-acting beta2 agonists then as required use is recommended.
    >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1++ | <5 Evidence level 1++

    Using two or more canisters of beta2 agonists per month or >10-12 puffs per day is a marker of poorly controlled asthma.
    >12 Evidence level 2++ | 5-12 Evidence level 4 | <5 Evidence level 4
    B 	D 	D 	Patients with high usage of inhaled short-acting beta2 agonists should have their asthma management reviewed.

4. 2 Step 2: introduction of regular preventer therapy

For steps 2, 3, and 4, treatments have been judged on their ability to improve symptoms, improve lung function, and prevent exacerbations, with an acceptable safety profile. Improvement of quality of life, while important, is the subject of too few studies to be used to make recommendations at present.

    4.2.1 INHALED STEROIDS

    Inhaled steroids are the most effective preventer drug for adults and children for achieving overall treatment goals.
    >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1++ | <5 Evidence level 1++
    A 	A 	A 	Inhaled steroids are the recommended preventer drug for adults and children for achieving overall treatment goals.
The exact threshold for introduction of inhaled steroids has never been firmly established. Two recent studies have shown benefit from regular use of inhaled steroids in patients with mild asthma. 526, 527 Benefit in these studies was seen even with an FEV1 of 90% predicted. >12 Evidence level 1+ | 5-12 Evidence level 1+
Inhaled steroids should be considered for patients with any of the following:

    exacerbations of asthma in the last two years
    using inhaled b2 agonists three times a week or more
    symptomatic three times a week or more, or waking one night a week.

Lung function measurements cannot be reliably used to guide asthma management in children under 5 years of age.
Starting dose of inhaled steroids

In mild to moderate asthma, starting at very high doses of inhaled steroids and stepping down confers no benefit.
>12 Evidence level 1+ | 5-12 Evidence level 1+ 
Start patients at a dose of inhaled steroids appropriate to the severity of disease.
In adults, a reasonable starting dose will usually be 400 mcg per day and in children 200 mcg per day. In children under 5 years, higher doses may be required if there are problems in obtaining consistent drug delivery.

Titrate the dose of inhaled steroid to the lowest dose at which effective control of asthma is maintained.
         Frequency of dosing of inhaled steroids

        Current inhaled steroids are slightly more effective when taken twice rather than once daily.
        >12 Evidence level 1+ | 5-12 Evidence level 4 | <5 Evidence level 4

        There is little evidence of benefit for dosage frequency more than twice daily. 
        A 	D 	D 	Give inhaled steroids initially twice daily.

        A 	D 	D 	Once a day inhaled steroids at the same total daily dose can be considered (within product licence) if good control is established.
    4.2.2 SAFETY OF INHALED STEROIDS

    The safety of inhaled steroids is of crucial importance and a balance between benefits and risks for each individual needs to be assessed. Account should be taken of other topical steroid therapy when assessing systemic risk.
        Adults

        
        There is little evidence that doses below 800 mcg per day cause any short-term detrimental effects apart from the local side-effects of dysphonia and oral candidiasis. However, the possibility of long-term effects on bone has been raised. Cross-sectional studies have shown possible dose-related reduction in bone-density. Other studies have shown effects on adrenocortical function of uncertain significance. One recent systematic review reported no effect on bone density at doses up to 1000 mcg per day. 528 The significance of small biochemical changes in adrenocortical function is unknown.

        
        	Titrate the dose of inhaled steroid to the lowest dose at which effective control of asthma is maintained.
        Children

        Administration of inhaled steroids at or above 400 mcg a day of BDP or equivalent may be associated with systemic side-effects.  These may include short-term growth suppression and adrenal suppression. 571 Clinical adrenal insufficiency has recently been identified in a small number of children presenting with hypoglycaemic episodes. The smallest dose of inhaled steroids compatible with maintaining disease control should be used. At higher doses, add-on agents, for example, long-acting beta2 agonists, should be actively considered.
        	Monitor children's height on a regular basis.
        	Consider the possibility of adrenal insufficiency in any child maintained on inhaled steroids presenting with a decreased level of consciousness; blood glucose levels should be checked urgently. Consider whether intramuscular (IM) hydrocortisone is required.

        
        	Titrate the dose of inhaled steroid to the lowest dose at which effective control of asthma is maintained.
    4.2.3 COMPARISON OF INHALED STERIODS

    Many studies comparing different inhaled steroids are of inadequate design and have been omitted from further assessment. In view of the clear differences between normal volunteers and asthma patients in the absorption of inhaled steroids, data from normal volunteers have not been taken into account. Only studies in which more than one dose of at least one of the inhaled steroids or both safety and efficacy had been studied together in the same trial were evaluated. Non-blinded studies also had to be considered because of the problems of obtaining competitors' delivery devices. All comparisons used BDP-CFC (chlorofluorocarbons) as the reference.

    BDP and budesonide are approximately equivalent in clinical practice, although there may be variations with different delivery devices. There is limited evidence from two open studies of less than ideal design that budesonide via the turbohaler is more clinically effective.  However, at present a 1:1 ratio should be assumed when changing between BDP and budesonide.

    Fluticasone provides equal clinical activity to BDP and budesonide at half the dosage. The evidence that it causes fewer side-effects at doses with equal clinical effect is limited.

    
    Mometasone is a new inhaled steroid and the relatively limited number of studies suggests it is equivalent to twice the dose of BDP-CFC. 521 The relative safety of mometasone is not fully established.
    4.2.4 OTHER PREVENTER THERAPIES

     Inhaled steroids are the first choice preventer drug. Long-acting inhaled beta2 agonists should not be used without inhaled corticosteroids. 529 Alternative, less effective preventer therapies in patients taking short-acting beta2 agonists alone are:
        Chromones
        (Sodium cromoglicate has an inconvenient dosing frequency) 
        - Sodium cromoglicate is of some benefit in adults
        > 5-12 Evidence level 1+
        - The evidence of benefits of sodium cromoglicates in children is contentious. 520, 568, 569This is under active review
        5-12 Evidence level 1+
        - Nedocromil sodium is of some benefit
        > 5-12 Evidence level 1++| 5-12 Evidence level 1+
        Leukotriene receptor antagonists have some beneficial clinical effect (and an effect on eosinophilic inflammation) 
        >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1++ | <5 Evidence level 1++
        Theophyllines have some beneficial effect (side-effects are more common and monitoring of plasma levels is required).
        >12 Evidence level 1+ | 5-12 Evidence level 1+ | <5 Evidence level 1+
        Long-acting inhaled beta2 agonists have some beneficial effects but they are not recommended as first line preventer therapy. 
        >12 Evidence level 1+ | 5-12 Evidence level 1+ | <5 Evidence level 1+
        Antihistamines and ketotifen are ineffective. 
        >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1++ | <5 Evidence level 1++

    
    	Long-acting inhaled beta2 agonists should not be used without inhaled corticosteroids.

4. 3 Step 3: add-on therapy

Before initiating a new drug therapy practitioners should recheck compliance, inhaler technique and eliminate trigger factors. The duration of a trial of add-on therapy will depend on the desired outcome. For instance, preventing nocturnal awakening may require a relatively short trial of treatment (days or weeks), whereas preventing exacerbations of asthma or decreasing steroid tablet use may require a longer trial of therapy (weeks or months). If there is no response to treatment the drug should be discontinued.

    4.3.1 CRITERIA FOR INTRODUCTION OF ADD-ON THERAPY

    No exact dose of inhaled steroid can be deemed the correct dose at which to add another therapy. The addition of other treatment options to inhaled steroids has been investigated at doses from 200-1000 mcg in adults and up to 400 mcg in children.Many patients will benefit more from add-on therapy than from increasing inhaled steroids above doses as low as 200 mcg/day. Furthermore, at doses of inhaled steroid above 800 mcg/day side-effects become more frequent. An absolute threshold for introduction of add-on therapy in all patients cannot be defined.
    >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1+
    A 	B 		Carry out a trial of other treatments before increasing the inhaled steroid dose above 800 mcg/day in adults and 400 mcg/day in children.
    4.3.2 ADD-ON THERAPY

    Options for add-on therapy are summarised in Figure 3.

    In adult patients taking inhaled steroids at doses of 200-800 mcg/day and in children taking inhaled steroids at a dose of 400 mcg/day the following interventions are of value:

    First choice would be the addition of an inhaled long-acting beta2 agonist (LABA), which improves lung function and symptoms, and decreases exacerbations. 
    >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1++
    A 	B 	X 	The first choice as add-on therapy to inhaled steroids in adults and children (5-12 years) is an inhaled long-acting beta2 agonist.
     

    If, as may happen occasionally, there is no response to inhaled long-acting beta2 agonist, stop the LABA and increase the dose of inhaled steroid to 800 mcg/day (adults) or 400 mcg/day (children) if not already on this dose. If there is a response to LABA, but control remains poor, continue with the LABA and increase the dose of inhaled steroid to 800 mcg/day (adults) or 400 mcg/day (children 5-12 years). 
    >12 Evidence level 4 | 5-12 Evidence level 4
    D 	D 	X 	If asthma control remains sub-optimal after the addition of an inhaled long-acting beta2 agonist then the dose of inhaled steroids should be increased to 800 mcg/day in adults or 400 mcg/day in children (5-12 years).
     
        Leukotriene receptor antagonistsprovide improvement in lung function, a decrease in exacerbations, and an improvement in symptoms.

        
        >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1++ | <5 Evidence level 1+
        Theophyllinesimprove lung function and symptoms, but side-effects occur more commonly.


        >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1-
        Slow release beta2 agonist tabletsalso improve lung function and symptoms, but side-effects occur more commonly.

        
        >12 Evidence level 1++
    	If control is still inadequate after a trial of LABA and after increasing the dose of inhaled steroid, consider a sequential trial of add-on therapy, i.e. leukotriene receptor antagonists, theophyllines, slow release beta2 agonist tablets (this in adults only).

    
    Addition of short-acting anticholinergics is generally of no value. Addition of chromones is of marginal benefit.
    >12 Evidence level 1+

    In patients on inhaled steroids whose asthma is stable, no intervention has been consistently shown to decrease inhaled steroid requirement in a clinically significant manner compared to placebo.
    4.3.3 COMBINATION INHALERS

    There is no difference in efficacy in giving inhaled steroid and long-acting beta2 agonist in combination or in separate inhalers.
    >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1++

 4.4 Step 4: poor control on moderate dose of inhaled steroid + add-on therapy: addition of fourth drug

In a small proportion of patients, asthma is not adequately controlled on a combination of PRN short-acting beta2 agonist as required, inhaled steroid 800 mcg daily) and an additional drug, usually a long-acting beta2 agonist. There are very few clinical trials in this specific patient group to guide management. The following recommendations are based on extrapolation from trials of add-on therapy to inhaled steroids and on previous guidelines.
D 	D 	X 	

If control remains inadequate on 800 mcg daily (adults) and 400 mcg daily (children) of an inhaled steroid plus a long-acting beta2 agonist, consider the following interventions:

    increasing inhaled steroids to 2000 mcg/day (adults) or 800 mcg/day (children 5-12 years)
    leukotriene receptor antagonists
    theophyllines
    slow release beta2 agonist tablets, though caution needs to be used in patients on long-acting beta2 agonists.

 

There are no controlled trials indicating which of these is the best option.
	If a trial of an add-on treatment is ineffective, stop the drug (or in the case of increased dose of inhaled steroid, reduce to the original dose).

	Before proceeding to step 5, consider referring patients with inadequately controlled asthma, especially children, to specialist care.
4.5 Step 5: continuous or frequent use of oral steroids

    4.5.1 PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF STEROID TABLET-INDUCED SIDE-EFFECTS

    Patients on long-term steroid tablets (e.g. longer than three months) or requiring frequent courses of steroid tablets (e.g. three to four per year) will be at risk of systemic side-effects:
        Blood pressure should be monitored.
        Diabetes mellitus may occur.
         Reduction in bone mineral density commonly occurs and should be monitored. Those receiving prednisolone for over three months should be prescribed a long-acting bisphosphonate (see new British Osteoporosis Society guidelines, www.nos.org.uk). 
        Growth should be monitored in children.
        Cataracts should be screened for in children.
    4.5.2 STEROID TABLET-SPARING MEDICATION

    The aim of treatment is to control the asthma using the lowest possible dose, or if possible, to stop long-term steroid tablets completely.

    Inhaled steroids are the most effective drug for decreasing requirement for long-term steroid tablets. 
    >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 4

    There is limited evidence for the ability of long-acting beta2 agonists, theophyllines, or leukotriene receptor antagonists to decrease requirement for steroid tablets, but they may improve symptoms and pulmonary function.
    A 	D 	X 	

    In adults, the recommended method of eliminating or reducing the dose of steroid tablets is inhaled steroids, at doses of up to 2000 mcg/day if required.

    In children aged 5-12, consider very carefully before going above a dose of 1000 mcg/day.
     

    D 	D 	D 	There is a role for a trial of treatment with long-acting beta2 agonists, leukotriene receptor antagonists, and theophyllines for about six weeks. They should be stopped if no improvement in steroid dose, symptoms or lung function is detected.

    Immunosuppressants (methotrexate, cyclosporin and oral gold) decrease long-term steroid tablet requirements, but all have significant side-effects. There is no evidence of persisting beneficial effect after stopping them; and there is marked variability in response.
    >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 3
    	Immunosuppressants, (methotrexate, cyclosporin and oral gold) may be given as a three month trial, once other drug treatments have proved unsuccessful. Their risks and benefits should be discussed with the patient and their side-effects carefully monitored. Treatment should be in a centre with experience of using these medicines.

    Colchicine and intravenous immunoglobulin have not been shown to have any beneficial effect in adults.
    >12 Evidence level 1+

    Continuous subcutaneous terbutaline infusion has been reported to be beneficial in severe asthma but efficacy and safety have not been assessed in RCTs.
    >12 Evidence level 4
    4.5.3 STEROID FORMULATIONS

    Prednisolone is the most widely used steroid tablet for maintenance therapy in chronic asthma. There is no evidence that other formulations offer any advantage.
    4.5.4 FREQUENCY OF DOSING OF STEROID TABLETS

    Although popular in paediatric practice, there are no studies to show whether alternate day steroids produce fewer side-effects than daily steroids.
    4.5.5 BETA-BLOCKERS

    Beta-blockers, including eye drops, are contraindicated in patients with asthma.

    Figure 4: Summary of stepwise management in adults 
Figure 5: Summary of stepwise management in children aged 5 - 12 years
igure 6: Summary of stepwise management in children less than 5 years
 4.6 Stepping down

 Stepping down therapy once asthma is controlled is recommended, but often not implemented leaving some patients over-treated. There are few studies that have investigated the most appropriate way to step down treatment. A study in adults on at least 900mcg per day of inhaled steroids has shown that for patients who are stable it is reasonable to attempt to halve the dose of inhaled steroids every three months. 530
	Regular review of patients as treatment is stepped down is important. When deciding which drug to step down first and at what rate, the severity of asthma, the side-effects of the treatment, the beneficial effect achieved, and the patient's preference should all be taken into account.


	Patients should be maintained at the lowest possible dose of inhaled steroid. Reduction in inhaled steroid dose should be slow as patients deteriorate at different rates. Reductions should be considered every three months, decreasing the dose by approximately 25-50% each time.
4.7 Specific management problems

    4.7.1 ONSET OF EXACERBATION OF ASTHMA

     Although recommended for both adults and children in previous guidelines and as part of asthma action plans, doubling the dose at the time of an exacerbation is of unproven value. In one small adult study of patients on a low dose (200mcg) of inhaled steroids, a five-fold increase in dose at the time of exacerbation led to a decrease in the duration of the exacerbation. This study should not be extrapolated to patients already taking higher doses of inhaled steroids and further evidence in this area is required.
    4.7.2 EXERCISE-INDUCED ASTHMA
    	For most patients, exercise-induced asthma is an expression of poorly controlled asthma and regular treatment including inhaled steroids should be reviewed.

    The following medicines give protection against exercise-induced asthma:
        inhaled steroids 
        >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1++
        short-acting beta2 agonists 
        >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1++
        long-acting beta2 agonists
        >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1++
        theophyllines
        >12 Evidence level 1- | 5-12 Evidence level 2+
        leukotriene receptor antagonists
        >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 2+
        chromones 
        >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 2+
        beta2 agonist tablets. 
        >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1+

    The following medicines do not give protection against exercise-induced asthma at normal doses:
        anticholinergics 
        >12 Evidence level 1+ | 5-12 Evidence level 1+
        ketotifen 
        >12 Evidence level 1+ | 5-12 Evidence level 1+
        antihistamine. 
        >12 Evidence level 1++ | 5-12 Evidence level 1++

    Long-acting beta2 agonists and leukotriene antagonists provide more prolonged protection than short-acting beta2 agonists, but a degree of tolerance develops with LABA particularly with respect to duration of action. No tolerance has been demonstrated with leukotriene receptor antagonists.
    >12 Evidence level 1++

    If exercise is a specific problem in patients taking inhaled steroids who are otherwise well controlled, consider the following therapies:
    A 	C 	X 	leukotriene receptor antagonists
     

    A 	A 	X 	long-acting beta2 agonists
     

    C 	C 	X 	cromones
     

    A 	A 	X 	oral beta2 agonists
     

    C 	C 	X 	theophyllines.
     

    A 	A 		Immediately prior to exercise, inhaled short-acting beta2 agonists are the drug of choice.
    4.7.3 RHINITIS

    Patients with asthma often have rhinitis. The most effective therapy is intranasal steroids. Treatment of allergic rhinitis has not been shown to improve asthma control.
    >12 Evidence level 1+
    4.7.4 ALLERGIC BRONCHOPULMONARY ASPERGILLOSIS

    In adult patients with allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA), itraconazole may decrease steroid tablet dose and improve asthma control. 
    >12 Evidence level 1+,2+
    C 	X 	X 	In adult patients with ABPA, a four month trial of itraconazole should be considered.
      	 

    	Careful monitoring of side-effects, particularly hepatic is recommended.
    4.7.5 ASPIRIN-INTOLERANT ASTHMA

    There are theoretical reasons to suggest that leukotriene receptor antagonists might be of particular value in the treatment of aspirin intolerant asthma. However, there is little evidence to justify managing patients with aspirin intolerant asthma in a different manner to patients tolerant of aspirin, apart from the rigorous avoidance of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications.
























