Prevention/delay of type 2 diabetes• Patients with impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) (A), impaired fasting glucose (IFG) (E), or an A1C 5.7–6.4% (E) should be referred to an effective ongoing support program targeting weight loss of 7% of body weight and increasing physical activity to at least 150 min/week of moderate activity such as walking.
Glycemic goals in adults• Lowering A1C to below or around 7% has been shown to reduce microvascular complications of diabetes, and if implemented soon after the diagnosis of diabetes is associated with long-term reduction in macrovascular disease. (B)
Providers might reasonably suggest more  stringent  A1C  goals  (such  as <6.5%) for selected individual patients, if this can be achieved without significant hypoglycemia or other adverse effects of treatment. (C)
If noninsulin monotherapy at maximal tolerated dose does not achieve or maintain the A1C target over 3–6 months, add a second oral agent, a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist, or insulin. (A)
Preconception care c A1C levels should be as close to normal as possible (<7%) in an individual patient before conception is attempted. (B)
Consider obtaining an A1C on patients with diabetes admitted to the hospital if the result of testing in the previous 2–3 months is not available. (E)
For patients with an abnormal hemoglobin but normal red cell turnover, such as sickle cell trait, an A1C assay without interference from abnormal hemoglobins should be used (an updated list is available at www. ngsp.org/interf.asp).
For example, if the A1C is 7.0% and a repeat result is 6.8%, the diagnosis of diabetes is confirmed.
However, if two different tests (such as A1C and FPG) are both above the diagnostic thresholds, the diagnosis of diabetes is also confirmed.
That is, if a patient meets the diabetes criterion of the A1C (two results >=6.5%) but not the FPG (<126 mg/ dL or 7.0 mmol/L), or vice versa, that person should be considered to have diabetes.
As is the case for individuals found to have IFG and IGT, individuals with an A1C of 5.7–6.4% should be informed of their increased risk for diabetes as well as CVD and counseled about effective strategies to lower their risks (see Section IV).
Accordingly, interventions should be most intensive and follow-up particularly vigilant for those with A1Cs above 6.0%, who should be considered to be at very high risk.
1. Testing should be considered in all adults who are overweight (BMI >=25 kg/m2*) and have additional risk factors:• physical inactivity• first-degree relative with diabetes• high-risk race/ethnicity (e.g., African American, Latino, Native American, Asian American, Pacific Islander)• women who delivered a baby weighing .9 lb or were diagnosed with GDM• hypertension (>=140/90 mmHg or on therapy for hypertension)• HDL cholesterol level <35 mg/dL (0.90 mmol/L) and/or a triglyceride level .250 mg/dL (2.82 mmol/L)• women with polycystic ovary syndrome• A1C >=5.7%, IGT, or IFG on previous testing• other clinical conditions associated with insulin resistance (e.g., severe obesity, acanthosis nigricans)• history of CVD
PREVENTION/DELAY OF TYPE 2 DIABETES    Recommendations• Patients with IGT (A), IFG (E), or an A1C of 5.7–6.4% (E) should be referred to an effective ongoing support program targeting weight loss of 7% of body weight and increasing physical activity to at least 150 min/week of moderate activity such as walking.
Based on the results of clinical trials and the known risks of progression of prediabetes to diabetes, persons with an     A1C of 5.7–6.4%, IGT, or IFG should be counseled on lifestyle changes with goals similar to those of the DPP (7% weight loss and moderate physical activity of at least 150 min/week).
For any individual patient, the frequency of A1C testing should be dependent on the clinical situation, the treatment regimen used, and the judgment of the clinician.
Because A1C is thought to reflect average glycemia over several months (63) and has strong predictive value for diabetes complications (71,72), A1C testing should be performed routinely in all patients with diabetes, at initial assessment and then as part of continuing care.
Clinicians should note that the numbers in the table are now different, as they are based on ~2,800 readings per A1C in the ADAG trial.
For patients in whom A1C/eAG and measured blood glucose appear discrepant, clinicians should consider the possibilities of hemoglobinopathy or altered red cell turnover, and the options of more frequent and/or different timing of SMBG or use of CGM.
Glycemic goals in adults  Recommendations• Lowering A1C to below or around 7% has been shown to reduce microvascular complications of diabetes and if implemented soon after the diagnosis of diabetes is associated with long-term reduction in macrovascular disease. (B)
• Providers might reasonably suggest more  stringent  A1C  goals  (such  as <6.5%) for selected individual patients, if this can be achieved without significant hypoglycemia or other adverse effects of treatment. (C)
Certainly, providers should be vigilant in preventing severe hypoglycemia in patients with advanced disease and should not aggressively attempt to achieve near-normal A1C levels in patients in whom such a target cannot be safely and reasonably easily achieved.
As regards goals for glycemic control for women with GDM, recommendations from the fifth International Workshop-Conference on Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (105) were to target maternal capillary glucose concentrations of:   • preprandial: <=95 mg/dL (5.3 mmol/L), and either:• 1-h postmeal: <=140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L) or• 2-h postmeal: <=120 mg/dL (6.7 mmol/L)    For women with pre-existing type 1 or type 2 diabetes who become pregnant, a recent consensus statement (106) recommended the following as optimal glycemic goals, if they can be achieved without excessive hypoglycemia:  • premeal, bedtime, and overnight glucose 60–99 mg/dL (3.3–5.4 mmol/L)• peak postprandial glucose 100–129 mg/dL (5.4–7.1 mmol/L)•  A1C <6.0%      D.
Postprandial glucose measurements should be made 1–2 h after the beginning of the meal, generally peak levels in patients with diabetes.
If noninsulin monotherapy at maximal tolerated dose does not achieve or maintain the A1C target over 3–6 months, add a second oral agent, a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist, or insulin. (A)
In selecting glycemic goals, the benefits on long-term health outcomes of achieving a lower A1C should be balanced against the risks of hypoglycemia and the developmental burdens of intensive regimens in children and youth.
Before meals plasma blood glucose range 100–180(mg/dL), bedtime plasma blood glucose range 110–200(mg/dL), and A1C<8.5% are goals for type 1 diabetes, if age-group is toddlers and preschoolers (0-6).
Before meals plasma blood glucose range 90–180(mg/dL), bedtime plasma blood glucose range 100–180(mg/dL), and A1C<8% are goals for type 1 diabetes, if age-group is school age (6–12).
Before meals plasma blood glucose range 90–130(mg/dL), bedtime plasma blood glucose range 90–150(mg/dL), and A1C<7.5% are goals for type 1 diabetes, if age-group is adolescents and young adults (13–19).
Postprandial blood glucose values should be measured when there is a discrepancy between preprandial blood glucose values and A1C levels and to help assess glycemia in those on basal/bolus regimens.
Preconception care  Recommendations• A1C levels should be as close to normal as possible (<7%) in an individual patient before conception is attempted. (B)
Consider obtaining an A1C on patients with diabetes admitted to the hospital if the result of testing in the previous 2–3 months is not available. (E)
To maximize equity and efficiency of preventive interventions, such an A1C cut point should balance the costs of “false negatives” (failing to identify those who are going to develop diabetes) against the costs of “false positives” (falsely identifying and then spending intervention resources on those who were not going to develop diabetes anyway).
Individuals with an A1C of 5.7–6.4% should be informed of their increased risk for diabetes as well as cardiovascular disease and counseled about effective strategies, such as weight loss and physical activity, to lower their risks.
Accordingly, interventions should be most intensive and follow-up should be particularly vigilant for those with A1C levels above 6.0%, who should be considered to be at very high risk.
For patients with a hemoglobinopathy but normal red cell turnover, such as sickle cell trait, an A1C assay without interference from abnormal hemoglobins should be used (an updated list is available at http://www.ngsp.org/interf.asp).
For example, if the A1C is 7.0% and a repeat result is 6.8%, the diagnosis of diabetes is confirmed.
That is, if a patient meets the diabetes criterion of the A1C (two results >=6.5%) but not the FPG (,126 mg/dl or 7.0 mmol/l), or vice versa, that person should be considered to have diabetes.
A management plan to achieve normal or near-normal glycemia with an A1C goal of ,7% should be developed for diabetes management at the time of initial medical evaluation.
A1C  should  be checked  every  3–6 months. (E)
At a minimum, the summary should include the following: the patient’s current medication schedule and dosages, the date and time of the last medication administration, any recent monitoring results (e.g., CBG and A1C), other factors that indicate a need for immediate treatment or management at the receiving facility (e.g., recent episodes of hypoglycemia, history of severe hypoglycemia or frequent DKA, concurrent illnesses, presence of diabetes complications), information on scheduled treatment/ appointments if the receiving facility is responsible for transporting the patient to that appointment, and name and telephone/fax number of a contact person at the transferring facility who can provide additional information, if needed The medical transfer summary, which acts as a quick medical reference for the receiving facility, should be transferred along with the patient.
The patient should be provided with a written summary of his/her current health care issues, including medications and doses, recent A1C values, etc. .
The data needed will vary depending on the type of job and the reason for the evaluation, but an evaluation should never be made based only on one piece of data, such as a single blood glucose result or A1C result.
An A1C or eAG cut off score is not medically justified in employment evaluations and should never be a determinative factor in employment.